foreign
okay so we are ready to start so welcome
to all of you for this very special
event
today is a unique day for several
reasons
we are here to celebrate the direct
medal which is one of the major events
for icdp in the year every year and is
one of the most prestigious Awards in
just so in theoretical physics worldwide
and and we have three
great uh scientists as a winners and we
have two top scientists also that we
give presentations for us
and but let me start with the sad part
as you may all know today Stephen
Hawking passed away
his uh
it's hard to emphasize or to ever
emphasize the impact he has had in many
generations of physicists
I personally consider him a very good
friend a colleague in Cambridge for many
years
uh this is a very sad moment for all the
scientific community
I can say that he he's a unique human
being in many respects he was
especially because there has never been
anybody like him in the history of the
human kind and there would never be any
better living in the future because the
condition he had it was such in such a
way that that the way he survived in a
way that nobody else has survived but
also the technology was ready only at
the time when he needed to be able to
communicate with people and so on in the
future other people may find other ways
to communicate and so in that sense even
in that regard he was also a pioneer we
know all his many contributions to
physics in particular to black holes to
gravity and cosmology in general
so um his impact in science will be
remember for many many years to come
I would say many generations of hundreds
of years because his discoveries first
of all from the results were Penrose
about the Eternal structure General
existence of singularities in general
relativity then the thermodynamics of
black holes the Hawking radiation the
waveforms of the universe and many other
contributions that he has been producing
over the years even recently he has been
working very closely to to solve the
problem that he created he pointed out
for the whole Community which is the
information Los Paradox that you can we
have more than 40 Years of several
generations of physicists trying to
solve and
he will also be remembered
and the influence that he has had to
measure for his great contributions
regarding the popularization on science
his no doubt was the main figure for
promotion of science
physics but in general science worldwide
so probably this is not exaggeration the
best known scientists in the world
and
so he has many legacies that uh
for us it would be invaluable to measure
the impact he has had in our lives in
the community in physics in general so I
will ask all of you you don't mind to
stand up and jog with me for a minute of
Silence
laughs
thank you
foreign
ER and a staunch friend of ictp
icp's founder Abdul Salam worked with
Iraq at Cambridge University and along
admire the professor in his work which
included conceiving the relativity wave
equation predict an existence of of
anti-particles and particular depository
and he was a regular visitor to a CPP
and Salam usually recognized that one of
the motivations he decided to the
particle physics was his work with Salah
with the director sorry
so the direct model recognizes
scientists who have made significant
contributions to theoretical physics and
you have seen a list of very prestigious
theoretical physicists over the past 26
26 27 years
and the recipients of the 2017 direct
medal award are Charles Bennett of the
IBM Watson Research Center David Deutsch
of Oxford University and Peter sharp of
the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology
all three are being honored for their
groundbreaking working applying
fundamental concepts of quantum
mechanics to solve the basic problems in
computation and communication
bringing together the fields of quantum
mechanics Computer Sciences and
information Theory
the committee this year for the this
election was kind of very unique because
as you can see each of the hour days has
a completely different background one
started as a chemist becoming
um computer scientists at some point
mathematician and the third one is a
periodical physicist
and the committee had a
very difficult
job to make the selection not because
there were this was
difficult to select because they needed
extra help for the selection because the
expertise of the committee is usually
more into theoretical physics and
discover many areas and I can mention
the name of the members of the committee
is the very distinguished physicist as a
person Michael Green
from the Cambridge president David Gross
from Santa Barbara for some bird
Halperin from Harvard versus Martin Rhys
in Cambridge Professor Ashok sen from
in India and Professor Giorgio Parisi
from Rome
so they were very pleased to come up
with this selection which I think is a
very especially unique in the history of
the
of the direct middle and we are all very
pleased with the end result so the
ceremony will begin with General Talks
by Peter zoller who is a former direct
medalist and which is a professor of the
University of innsbrucking quantum
operates and also Arthur Ecker my former
colleague from Cambridge and also not
foreign
and then after that we have a coffee
break and we start with the awards
ceremony which each of each of the
awardees will give a presentation
so let's uh
as a pretty solid to start
his presentation and please join me in
welcoming paper
[Applause]
foreign
okay so let me start out by
congratulating the winners of this
actually last year's direct medal
and I just want to I put down here this
citation you know that was given for the
price it says here for pioneering work
in applying fundamental concepts of
quantum mechanics to solving basic
problems in computation communication
and therefore bringing together the
fields of quantum mechanics computer
science and information and I have to
say that I could not more than agree
with these prices to these people here
that represents the whole spectrum of
what defines Quantum information which
is by definition very you know
interdisciplinary and what I would like
to do in my talk here today is this that
I would like to sort of you know give
you a part historical talk going back 25
years or maybe 30 years where many of
these things started or where I got sort
of you know influenced by all of these
ideas here
um and then sort of in the second part
of my talk give you a snapshot of what
we're doing at the moment so I'm
somebody whose background is quantum
Optics so I was interested or became
interested how do we actually build a
quantum computer so Quantum
communication devices Quantum networks
and all of these things from a
theoretical perspective it will say that
many of these ideas that 25 years ago
were just dreams you know in the
meantime are reality and as time is
progressing and all these realities are
becoming also Quantum Technologies and
might have actually quite an important
impact on our you know life even in the
future so I think that this is one of
the Prime examples of basic science
interdisciplinary science that at the
end is becoming something that so even
sort of you know useful from the
perspective of society
um I could not you know
refused to sort of a show very old
photos this is like political party
meetings of quantum information 25 years
ago and I have to say that two of The
Prize winners are here in this photo I'm
sure that Charlie Bennett actually put
himself in Photoshop into this picture
because you were always the one that
took these pictures
okay
oh you ran on the title because okay yes
sir and Peter Shore is over here
and I'm not sure exactly why these
meetings happened in Torino but actually
they were really sort of you know very
interesting ones because people came
together from all different communities
and talked uh for quite a while and uh
you know just we can see out the Eckhart
is hiding a little bit here uh David
even gensor and you can also see that
I'm over here and Ignatius Iraq is
hiding over here this was you know we
were just at this meeting there for two
days and this was our first presentation
of this idea of iron trap Quantum
Computing that I will afterwards tell
you a little bit more about
um people were asking me in Ignacio why
were you hiding and this answer was that
I was a little bit embarrassed by being
surrounded of people that were all a
little bit weird but I guess that's sort
of the definition of office of
physicists I guess at all you know
um so this is Ignacio how we really
looked at this stage today's money has
changed a little bit Yeah and here's of
course you know this is from the David
genso blog uh you know all of the names
here and many famous people and also
people that are here in the audience
that obviously if you know present at
this meeting so these were historical
meetings where uh these things were sort
of starting and uh one thing that sort
of started From my perspective is that
during this year it was actually
1994 uh I learned about the quantum
Computing and the way that I will
summarize now and as you will see
Outdoor Academy has been very
influential all of these things Quantum
simulation Quantum communication with
Quantum Optics it's a title with four
quantum so I mean damn it you know it
cannot go more Quantum than that and you
might ask yourself you know what's this
thing in the background over here and
this thing in the background here is
actually an iron tribe quantum computer
as we have it at the moment in this book
you know with a few qubits uh this is
the work by Rhino blood is an
experimentalist we have a very close
collaboration and they will afterwards
tell you how these ideas work but even
also know what the perspective is behind
some of that and what we're doing right
now and if the number of qubits that you
would like to see is a little bit more
this is from a recent paper in nature by
Chris Monroe who also is a company now
it's called inq so there's even a
commercial version of of building I2
quantum computers now available you
might buy even able to buy some of these
devices in the future
um as I said you know for me actually
the moment where you learn these things
that somehow is the point where you take
a different tone in science as an atomic
physics and call them up expression was
a talk that was given by Auto Eckert it
will be the second speak after me uh at
the iCup conference in both the iCup is
a very prestigious International
Conference in atomic physics usually
very experimentally dominated so it was
entirely sort of you know my my own
conference but this icap had you know
one very particular feature they always
try to invite people that uh one or two
not too many that burns sort of a little
bit outside it would somehow bring new
things into Atomic physics and stimulate
the field and this is I have no idea who
actually invited you out to this
conference about some clever guy in the
program committee must be and so but
Auto came and gave a talk that I would
really say you know change to a lot of
these things that were around it's
really diverted I would say uh the
interest in atomic physics 2 quality
information processing and I've sort of
a few old slides that they're not
precisely the presentation that auto
gave but it gets very close so I stole
them from you from some of you later
dogs and let me go through these things
very quickly because they're a little
bit historical slides they show you you
know what the kind of things were that
were around the equations being asked
what the challenges were
they're sort of starting out by making
this remark Computing is a physical
process you know here's sort of a
classical physical process you're just
moving beats around and so on and of
course our present computers you know
process information according to laws of
classical physics we understand of
course uh the Deutsche is now over here
and now we see that at the fundamental
nature of nature based the laws of
quantum physics and at the fundamental
level therefore information science must
also be a Quantum information science I
think this is sort of the starting point
you know of all of these things were
happening and the question is is it at
the end more powerful and we believe
that the answer is yes in particular
sense you know outdoor activities
reported that the show algorithm was
just invented you know a few months I
guess before this thing and this was
sort of he finally had in killer
application you know that was a very
true and deep motivation for pursuing
these kind of things
and so here's this information and
physics Quantum processor when you look
inside we have now here a set of qubits
and all of these things that I will
explain now here briefly but sort of why
do we want to do these things and again
this is from how to install cases
technology to be more slow
um yeah we would still some extent agree
with that yeah computer science new
complexity classes we still hope for
that physics to learn more about Quantum
Theory this is always true by definition
so it's kind of a win-win situation over
here and of course what we learned from
Outer Stockton is that the basic element
instead of the classical bit that only
takes on value series and one is now the
quantum bit which is a superposition of
two Quantum stage zero and one so we can
have things like zero plus one over here
represented here on the blocks here and
this classical versus the quantum bit
that can be in the superposition and I'm
not sure exactly where I got this
picture from I guess from behind the
blood if you look at it you know there's
an old woman and there's a young girl
all at the same time sort of symbolizing
this thing of the qubit as being in the
superposition State don't take this
thing too literally of course
and of course we have Quantum registers
and this is where entanglement comes in
that it can store of course in the sense
of superposition States in our Quantum
register superposition you know of all
these different numbers at the same time
this is not against an entanglement and
of course what we're doing with our
quantum computers sort of in the
laboratory trying to breed little
schrodigger cats that are doing this
computation for us so entanglements
superpositions of them avoiding the
coherence as the coupling to the
environment this sort of essentiate all
of these things
and of course the statement well called
the memory how big is it that if you
take something like two uh say 300
qubits you know uh two to the 300 this
is the dimension of the human space the
statement is that the silver Space is
really huge and this is of course the
point where people like five men came in
originally in his seminal presentation
86 you know making this statement well
if you're a quantum mechanical person
and you would like to simulate something
on the quantum computer Hilbert space is
pretty big and it's hard to do so why
not turn things around and build a
Quantum device that can actually you
know simulate Quantum devices as a
programmable system this was sort of the
you know a second lag in which all of
these things built and this is sort of
the starting point that would be today
called Quantum simulators
so but one of the things that auto
mentioned in this talk was of course
that the big challenge is how do we
actually build the quantum computer
because at that point more than you and
what are the challenges to do so well uh
if you want to build a Quantum um uh
process first of all you need a set of
qubits you know that can be in a
superposition State and Tangle State and
they need a way of manipulating these
things that if you look inside this
Quantum processor that you can see that
there's sort of if you read this thing
like a kind of a world line there will
be Gates that operate on these things
and there's two kind of gates you know
the single qubit Gates that make certain
rotations of your qubit or the block
sphere and if you combine these things
with two qubit gates like a c naught
gate that's indicated over here they
feel control qubit the Target qubit and
there's some unitary operation that
conditions to the state of the first one
you operate on the second one if you can
build this kind of gates the second one
being the entangling gates that you can
just put all of these things together
and in principle you have your function
in quantum computer provided you have a
way at the end to read these things out
so the historical challenge was to come
up with different implementations you
know with ways of implementing these
kind of gates and what we talk about is
of course a network model and of course
what's behind all of these things is
that these Gates operate on two quarter
mechanical superposition States what we
now call Quantum parallel processing
sort of this was the envisioning part
you know in this original idea behind
the quantum information processing
of course you know much of the
motivation then was given by the shore
algorithm and there is also the Deutsche
chosen algorithm is an example where we
have a certain Quantum advantage
and it's always based on the fact that
what the quantum computer does is it's
like a big interferometer but it is you
know big Hilbert space where we take
different computational bars but we can
let them interfere and something like
they show algorithm for example it just
really uses this thing in order to get
the corresponding Advantage out
so with this I'm sort of at the at the
end of this introduction and what sort
of you know we walked out and ignacious
Iraq over here and I was sitting in this
talk about how to act up and we looked
digital and said I guess we know how to
actually build something like this
because we were just working on trapped
irons you know that were developed for
atomic clocks and uh we had some ideas
how to build this case so let me just
give you the qualitative insight and
then I would like to show you where we
are right now uh in the laboratory in
our collaboration with exponentalist web
yard what was the idea so you know
people were building for atomic clocks
iron traps and this is a single atom
that's a single atom over here these are
ions so they repel each other and you
can put them in like an very unisotropic
harmonic oscillator so that they
essentially go to an equilibrium
situation if you cool them down to very
low temperatures okay so we cool away
all of the phonons this can be done by
laser Cooling and you can see this as
some sort of being representative as the
quantum register see that it spins up
and spin down and of course there will
be a superposition of all of this and
this is the qubits you know the quantum
register that we would like to
manipulate and how do we manipulate it
well if you would like to do single
humid rotations on the Block sphere you
can do these things by just shining
lasers on one of them and the distance
between these ions is something like a
few micrometers so you can actually do
this in an experiment but there's also
phonons and you can try to Quantum
control the motion of these phonons and
this is part of the building blocks then
sort of you know of peeling the
corresponding set of gates that
constitute the quantum computer so on
the left hand side we have this Quantum
logic Network model all of these Gates
and we can certainly know all of these
elements we can build with Hardware
which is here on the right hand side and
there's many groups out there that are
pursuing these things there are we at
the moment in the lab so if you go to
experimental papers from Recently you
know these experimentalists have
developed a sort of a complete gate set
over here on very simple lasers that are
shining all these things but just based
on this original idea and what's kind of
interesting is that we have now like a
little Quantum compiler so if you have
some unitary some Quantum algorithm that
you have you can decompose it you know
in the different bits and pieces and we
have Quantum compilers that tell us you
know what sequence of laser pulses you
have to shine on these ions to represent
a certain Quantum computation
of course the show algorithm was one of
the key applications initially and it's
released but I would say the point of
course is that the number of qubits and
the number of operations and here we
talk not about doing error correction
here at the moment it's just horrendous
so we have to wait a little bit except
we want to factorize 21 or so where some
people might even know the answer you
know
so I would say that a lot of interest
has focused in recent years on Quantum
simulation and this is like taking a
many body system that we have out there
according to many body system like a
spin system and you would like to for
example uh calculate on a universal
quantum computer here uh the time
evolution of a mini body system that's
represented as a set of spins and let me
sort of point out this is what we call
digital Quantum simulation that would
also be analog Quantum simulation at the
end uh think of this like having a many
body system which is available some spin
up and spin down and you'll specify a
certain hamiltonian and by shining laser
policies you can hear as a function of
time it uses certain time Evolution
which in a stop is Copic sense mimics a
certain hamiltonian over here and to
illustrate you what I mean by that for
example if you take a simple hamiltonian
of two spins like an easy model here and
over the transverse field these
operators will not commute here you can
always decompose the unitary time
evolution in Little Steps and we can
filterize them by decomposing these two
parts that we have over here in these
hamiltonians and we can write them as
Gates so if you know how to do Gates you
know entangling case see the qubit gates
you can mimic the time evolution of the
quantum antibody system
and a few years ago you know these were
the kind of things that experimentalists
were playing with where you write down
the hamiltonian like familiar say an
easy hamiltonian over here and this was
comparison Theory and experiment it was
only up to about six bins in the
meantime as I said before they can do it
up to about 20 or maybe even 50 of these
bins but you can also write down very
exotic hamiltonians like the one over
here which is a six body direction and
you can just program these things on
your device to mimic the corresponding
time evolutions
so this was a few years ago more recent
work and I'm not going to explain all of
the details here is this that we can
take models that become sort of
interesting like you know a schwinger
model of one plus one dimensional
Quantum molecular Dynamics uh of course
the hope at the end is to do something
more non-trivial like maybe a
non-abelian lattice cage theory in two
Dimensions but this is I can tell you a
little bit in the future and we can sort
of take a model like this and we can map
it to a certain number of qubits over
here and you know this nature paper here
and the people who should get the credit
these days mentalists here and casino is
the theorist you can certainly mimic
these things and here's a comparison
Theory and experiments to be honest it's
only a few dropper steps but actually
you see you should see these things as
the starting point of a development
where these devices you know are at the
point where at one point we might be
able to solve some difficult problems
that classical computers not right not
be able to solve
what's really impressive in this
experiment was the fact that it was only
four qubits but 220 Quantum Gates were
possible so these Gates became so
accurate in the meantime that you can do
220 Gates before the whole system falls
apart that's quite an amazing
development I mean given that you could
write your nature paper you know 15
years ago if you're able to do a single
gate now we talk about 220 so things are
becoming sort of a certain maturity in
this context
there's also another way of doing
Quantum simulation and I just want to
mention this because the Beloved
afterwards refer to this which is what
we call analog Quantum simulation so far
I've talked about Quantum Computing
about Gates you know single two qubit
gates and all of these things you can
also try to sort of you know imitate
condo many body Dynamics uh by simply
designing your system in such a way that
you mimic directly the corresponding
hamiltonians uh not this you know this
digitized version that we had here
before and you can also do that with
ions and the way that you do it is that
you can sort of shine in lasers and
these lasers will distort these iron
crystals and if you eliminate this thing
you get effective spin spin interactions
out from this whole thing allowing you
to realize the model of this type and
here's an example of you know if I take
all spin Downs I take a model like an X
Y model Sigma plasma minus if I flip one
spin over here you can see now that the
spin oxidation moves here to the left
and moves also here to the right and you
can try to see the entanglement because
if I give you one spin over here which
is at the same time moving to the right
and to the left it means that if the
spin Up is on the right that there's a
spin dial then the left and vice versa
so you got sort of epr type
entanglements over here and that's
exactly what these experiments sort of
are able to demonstrate so we have here
possibilities to build all of these very
exotic spin models for example and of
course that's here in the case of 1D but
we can also do more generally so let me
sort of try to to summarize you know
what after
yes the experimental situation is on the
atomic
Atomic or the atomic physics side we
have now systems available and the ions
is just one example
where we can essentially have complete
control either in the sense of building
little Harvard models or in building for
example with rootberg atoms rootberg
arrays over here and what is rootberg
arrays do it says that they allow one
sort of to really one by one build
Quantum systems and engineer their
corresponding interactions so we have
the whole toolbox available in the
laboratory and whenever you have a
favorite you know hamiltonian that you
would like to implement there's a good
chance that experimentalists at the
moment you know we'll be able to do that
and of course here the iron traps is one
example
uh what's really interesting is that in
these Atomic systems that we have you
have complete control by being able to
talk to the individual qubit separately
so we have single side control this is
control on the absolute low level of
single quanta of your system you cannot
get more Quantum control than something
like that
and of course it comes with the fact
that if you take new tools like the
Quanto gas
bite that these new tools allow your
level of single atoms on the level of
single spins so I would say this is sort
of achieving in the call to many body
system complete control over these
systems and of course me and this book
are quite proud because many of these
ideas like these Harvard models the ions
and also rip works and so on built on
theoretical ideas that we developed uh
you know in his book some time ago in
collaboration of course with many people
and this sort of a note now takes me to
the
the new part of my talk where you might
ask yourself what do we want to do now
what do we what can we do now based on
this experimental progress and I want to
summarize it by simply saying that well
experimentalists have single side
control in these many body systems and
what's also coming in the sense that
they could do these experiments with
very high repetition rates and then of
course USA theories start to think about
these things what should we do with that
you know we have new tools available
what should we do and if you know one
example that we're working
with the experimentalists where we have
new theoretical ideas and at the end
these leads that do a whole new
generation of uh experimental
realizations
and I will talk a particularly about
measuring entanglement as many entropies
and of course I have to explain to you
in detail what it means
but before I do that I want to sort of
you know highlight one very recent
development that I find is very exciting
related to rootberg atoms you know these
systems
I've talked about ions I've mentioned
the Habit models a little bit and this
is sort of a new toy in this context and
it's a very beautiful example of kind of
a bottom-up you know engineering that
one does of really being able to control
single systems and qubits
uh I guess all of you know what the
tweezer is you know from biology where
you focus the laser and they're able to
trap a particle but you can do the same
thing also with atoms so you can trap
atoms you can call Laser code and down
and if you do n of them which is very
easy to do hello some of them will have
an atom some of them not called uh what
you do now is this that you can actually
remove entropy By Hand by simply finding
out which ones are occupied or Not by
simply seeing the fluorescence so this
allows you in a way sort of to you know
build a Quantum system kind of bottom up
and I want to show you examples the
first line you know is sort of this is
filled this is filled is empty empty
anti you can simply rearrange all of
these things here together and if you
for example you know pay the
experimentalists appear you can even you
know have your name written so uh this
context then you can do these things
also in 2D so these are really sort of
button up design you know you want an
atom there you know with this kind of
interaction you can do these things now
in the lab okay what's really promising
is the fact that the next generation
will have you know about 1 000 of these
atoms in one t 2D and 3D so we're
getting at the point where we can maybe
really make these things useful you know
in a completely new context
uh here's an example so if I take now
this system over here and I can excite
atoms to rootberg States and I will not
try to play the volley of the atomic
physicist uh then you can essentially
design models that you want that build
you know on basic interactions that you
can engineer in this Atomic system so
the bottom line of the story that you
should sort of take is a take-home
message is that from an experimental
point of view these systems have been
developed you know down to the point
where I can engineer Quantum many body
systems that is called the many body
systems can be controlled you know on
the level of talking to these atoms or
spins or qubits individually turning on
either actions it will we can really
sort of design toolbox here of of these
Quantum of General Quantum many pollen
systems
so given all of that telement this thing
comes back now to theorists and you have
to provide now ideas and sort of you
know come up can be answered our
questions based on these things that are
maybe interesting
and I would like to present now a few
slides on ideas that we're working on at
the moment that started some time ago as
purely theoretical ideas but I will show
you at the end of my talk now that you
know we convince the experimentalists go
to the lab and try it they tried it and
it works so I will tell you now a story
that sort of uh you know motivated uh
one hand by new experimental
possibilities at the end then also leads
to you know experimental realization and
all of these things happen just within
one year
and I would like to ask now a question
which is very important you know
whenever we talk about Quantum
simulation and all of these things we
talk about entanglement in these systems
and the question is this can be actually
measured as a protocol entanglement in
systems uh like for example you know if
I give you a Quantum anybody system and
it's in a pure State then of course you
know the phenomen entropy will have
entropy zero but if I partition it the
partitioning and the entropy will then
be a mixtape and this mixed state will
have an entropy which is not equal to
zero so these are the kind of things
that you're asked and uh so you have
here called the many body system that is
subdivided A and B and we would like to
measure for example here Define the
reduced density Matrix where we trace it
over the second part defining this row a
here for example it's a ground state of
a certain system and then we have here
you know an entropy uh this either is a
phenomenon and to be will be interested
actually the following you know in this
rainy entropies that are power of road
to here to the power n and this if
you're a Quantum anybody person then you
will find this interesting because my
characterize here uh said topological or
strongly correlated Quantum phases so
you would like to build new tools you
know that are available uh in these
experiments that answer interesting
Quantum anybody questions that so far
could not be answered so the question is
can we actually measure things like
these things over here
well some time ago uh we were interested
in the story and as you will see how to
act it will again now get credit for
some of the earliest ideas in this
context but he thought much more in a
Quantum Computing context
can be measured any entropies with
copies and the idea says that if I
actually want copy of a system and then
the second one so I have a tensor
product over here there's protocols that
allow one to extract the Trees of row a
squared
um and uh we wrote some Theory papers
over here which uh then Marcus Garner
picked up and we found certain protocols
where actually these things could be
implemented and here's an example where
you have two copies you know one over
here and one over here these are Harvard
models that are being implemented and I
would like to tell you now a little bit
what the underlying ideas are but then
replace this protocol by something which
is now maybe much easier and for the
experimental it's also much more
friendly to implement so but I need this
thing is a warm up here
so the story that AutoCAD told us you
know for quite some time ago was the
following one well imagine that you're
interested in trace of road to the power
n
but you have the ability to make any
copies of a Quantum system like this
thing over here
how do you get from this thing here this
trace of road to the power n and the
answer was that well if you introduce
and operator BN this is essentially a
swap operator then it simply reorders
all of these indices that they have over
here in such a way that the trace of rho
to the power n you know is acting with
the swap operator or this tensor product
of these density matrices here just the
expectation value of this quantity over
here so if you can measure this
expectation value and sort of implement
this swap operator you have here the
trace of road to the power n which are
the Israeli entropies that one is
interested in
any sort of a simple example that
illustrates what we mean by that if I
take two copies here below and I
introduce a swap operator which simply
interchanges these two indices as you
can see over here then if you go through
the mark down here trace of you know the
swap operator Row one tensor Row 2
converts these things at the end to row
one row two and that's exactly what we
would like to do in our systems
well it turns out that what Auto had in
mind originally was the whole Quantum
circuit and actually these things would
be pretty tough to build and you need a
real quantum computer for doing these
things
now we came up with ideas how you can
actually avoid all of these
complications at least in the case of
Hybrid models and this led without
telling you the details so this these
papers here to these protocols that
underlie these experiments so these are
similar papers by Marcus Greiner which
by building two copies over here allowed
one to measure in our rainy entropies
and in principle which exists but let me
now give you a version which is actually
very cute physically but at the same
time I think it is also something that's
experimentally much simpler and this is
I would like to measure rainy entropies
via random measurements
and it works for a single system
so these were theoretical ideas that are
not even one year old sort of you know
published in his papers over here and I
want to give particular credit to
Andreas adminant uh um marriage for all
of that and you can see my old
collaboration with Ignacio CRX sort of
Reviving over here and there is even one
of the resident ictp physicists here
Mark Trello that participated in this
work
so I find these ideas behind this
actually very cute and as I said also
useful so let me tell you what the what
the underlying ideas are what we would
like to do is sort of play a replica
trick you know if you have two copies of
a system then we are able to measure
rainy entropy so let's try to make a
virtual copy and you will ask me what do
you mean by virtual copy and I'll say
that the virtual copies exactly the
replica tricks that we know so well from
the work of Parisi for example uh you
know there's usually more mathematical
tricks but out of this mathematical
tricks we make something over here which
at the end becomes a real measurement
protocol
so how does it work well I go back to an
old paper by Stephen van Anki and he
pointed out the following thing that
suppose that he got a spin system over
here and you're interested you know in a
certain subsystem that they call a over
here and let's apply now over here uh
some UA which is some random unitary
operations on the spins that they have
here of Interest
if you make measurements after that then
you can see that the probabilities that
we find over here are just given by this
formula you know row then you scramble
It Up by these random unitaries and then
you do your measurement this gives you
the probability
but now let's do the following suppose
that I average now this thing over all
possible unit there is then of course
the answer for these probabilities will
be very boring because all of them will
be if I've done very good scrambling all
of them will be the same and just equal
to a constant but what's very
interesting is that if you look at the
square of this probability and then you
average then you find that indeed here
is your rainy entropy appearing so
there's a way of measuring many
entropies by looking fluctuations in the
systems in with random measurements okay
and if you ask yourself why is it the
case well let me just write down the p
squared over here and I write it now
just taking the formula over here twice
but I write it under one trace and now
you can see it's like by having the
square over here we're sort of making
two virtual copies of the system here
and if our you know unitary operator
that we have over here belongs to
Circular unitary Ensemble we get like if
you have gaussians for example cross
correlations this U will be correlated
with that here but there will also be
cross correlation between these two
different virtual copies and this is the
one that makes the Mac the Magic of at
the end you know allowing us sort of
here to extract the wind entropies from
that in Quantum information this is
called two design or t design in a more
General context and so you can see that
if in a system like that we're able to
perform random measurements there will
be you know possibilities for extracting
interesting stuff like for example
Romania entropies is designed you know
it's an indicator quantifier of
entanglement measurements the question
is of course have to realize and how
many measurements and unitaries we need
this is getting a more technical
discussion and I've just have a few
slides that should sort of indicate you
and then I'll show you some expanded
results
so the measurement protocol so the flow
at the end it will be something like
this where we have time and then
experimental is to stand an interesting
Quantum Dynamics over here preparing a
certain interesting Quantum State maybe
on the quantum computer or the quantum
simulator and then we would like to ask
can we measure Trace Road to this power
n of a subsystem over here
and the way that we do it is is that the
random unit there is we simply build up
by using the fact that I pointed out
before we have available in the
laboratory in front of many body systems
that we have single side addressing so I
can go in for example and make a random
disorder you know and it becomes a
programmable random disorder that we can
add to our systems
uh and what we have at the very end is
this that if I do sort of a series of
mini quenches you know with different
disorder systems over here the question
is how does this thing here converts to
a circular unitary Ensemble uh how many
of these you know these all the patterns
we need that we have to program in an
experiment like that
and these answers answered over here by
having for example an easy model you
know with a certain number of Lefty side
and a certain disorder all of these
things are experimentally available like
the root work system so you can see that
if I do about 10 disorder patterns then
these things have converged down here
essentially to the value that we want so
it takes about you know say in this case
here 10 kilo is all the realizations in
order to converge down uh to the fact
that we have unitaries that approximate
value at least at the second order
correlation function the circular unit
variant sample
all of these things are available in the
lab and if you ask yourself how fast
does it converge then the answer is
simply that the number of necessary
trenches sort of also scales with the
system size which is your subsystem size
that you want and this works in 1D and
then two days these are sort of
theoretical checks that we do over here
so in that sense we have an efficient
generation of random unitaries for
period measurements
so all of these things that we do here
is essentially is that in our controlled
Quantum anybody system we can sort of do
chaos by Design and by this chaos by
Design construct a measurement protocol
out of these things so that P to the
power n gives us this rainy entropy to
the nth power and it's based on the fact
that we have these correlation functions
over here that we imitate with our
random disorder that should approximate
as well as possible the circular unit
area and solvers over here
well these results are sort of
consistent with random with random Gates
that people are trying to do for example
with super conducting circuits at the
moment but in our case I would say we
get these things essentially here for
for free in our systems
so the measurement protocol that sort of
works like this that we have here you
know a sequence of random unitaries that
we have to implement and then we do our
standard measurement and here the
quantum gas microscope comes in all of
these tools are available in the
laboratory and we have to repeat these
things and the question is a bit how
often do we have to repeat all of that
and the answer is well there's a certain
scaling over here and I will not enter
the details behind it what it simply
means is that in these experiments if
you do about 100 measurements and if you
do about 100 unitaries then this is
essentially for sufficient you know for
the system sizes that we can do in our
context
of what's this thing now enabling uh
well maybe you would like to see
something like an area law all of you I
guess know that if you have a Quantum
system and they take a certain subsystem
out of over here uh in a system of being
the area law it simply means that the
entropies will scale proportional to the
circumference of this area that you have
over here and indeed if you make this
system large enough this is sort of what
you see ideally if you apply a protocol
in this context and you can see that
with a sufficient number of these
disorders we are right on top so this
would be a way of experimentally
measuring area law has never done before
and I think this is now sort of
constructing tools that will allow us to
do so
or if you're interested in say many body
localization and you would like to see
that that you have entropy growth you
know entropy growth which is logarithmic
hidden systems and you would like to see
that again we can use our protocol and
be applied it you know and you can see
this is sort of the simulated data
points and this would be simulated
measurement over here so we see the
possibilities that these new tools that
we have available will us allowed to do
to see completely new physics in this
context
uh you know a few weeks ago I got from
from Christian rules in the Rhino Bloods
group you know this email over here
they've implemented these ideas and um
what you can see here is results for
rainy entropy so the system first of all
for 10 ions and this is supposed to be a
product saved initially so down here
they are doing some French Dynamics you
know the total system should be pure so
this thing should go down to zero on the
right hand side over here this is
exactly what you expect you know for
this entanglement entropies to be in
these French dynamics that we have you
know in trenches and they can even do it
for 20 ions sort of as a result over
here and I would say that we have the
tools now available if you can do these
things for larger system towards testing
what we call this Quantum Supremacy and
the nice thing is that these protocols
that we have here of course available
for many systems
add a few voice lights and Quantum
networks and quantum computers so maybe
do networking and protocols and all of
that but how do I so it will give a dog
afterwards that won't Quantum
communication so it will basically skip
these things you know instead of set the
light links we would like to talk about
say networking of quantum computers with
these things here so this would be an
extra talk uh but I guess you sort of
got the idea here of snapshot of these
developments figure 25 years ago
that led now to experimental programs
that are now at the point I guess where
we get new and interesting physics out
and at the same time you know we are
sort of opening the door also do Quantum
Technologies and let me conclude by
congratulating The Medalist here again
for the pioneering work you know it
started all by the ideas of these
gentlemen and I just want to make as the
last remark here the sentence very often
these days we hear essentially about
Quantum Technologies I think we should
not forget
uh there's a Synergy and there's an
intimate connection between basic
science and Quantum Technologies if
somebody tells you that building a
quantum computer is just now in
engineering task and nothing more these
people are wrong I would say that a lot
of the basic science questions both on
the hardware side but also on the
conceptual side are still open and
keeping these synergies in mind I think
is something which is fundamental and
when you hear discussions about the
flagship you know Flagship or Quantum
technology by personal wish would have
been that it was a flagship for Quantum
science and Quantum Technologies and
this is sort of the last remark because
we can see that there's a long history
now behind it and the time the engineers
take these things over has not come yet
okay so congratulations again to the
direct medalist Prize winners this year
and uh for this I would like to conclude
my thought
[Applause]
thank you very much Peter is a great
presentation
any question
we have a very short time but any urgent
question will be welcome
here's a question there
thank you very much really it's a
perfect talk um just about the notion of
inside limit can we find another
correlation type than anything element I
was reading something about the Discord
but I was reading that peoples is
skeptical about the Discord so what can
you say about this point
okay so you would like to measure
Discord over here well people have done
these things of measuring Discord but I
would say that you know what we were
interested in was the I would say real
thing of really disentanglement
entropies because this is the part
that's sort of interesting from the many
body point of view if you are going as
better person so this goes in a
different direction and uh I think that
they're sort of measuring from a
condensed matter point of view the real
thing you know it's like Coca-Cola and
Pepsi you know okay
yeah thank you
very good so let's thank the Peter again
now we like to record
please join me to welcome Arthur and uh
[Applause]
how does it works
or what is this one okay
all right so um thank you very much for
inviting me here and I should say
beat that solar gave me probably too
much credit than I deserve because you
know
when it comes to this particular field
at some point it was absolutely
essential to be taken seriously only
taken seriously when you convince the
experimentalists to do something in this
particular area and I thought that
people like pitted solar and ignacio's
Iraq were ideal people who no those are
theories who are working with
experimentalism experimentalists are
trusting that kind of people they
wouldn't trust those wacky individuals
working in this Quantum information
science at the very beginning so I
thought you know oh Kudos goes to Peter
and Ignacio for spreading the word and
this kind of contaminating
experimentalists who've entered into
this field anyway but um
I
should
perhaps start by congratulating the
three
people whom
who got the Dirac price of Charlie and
David and and Peter
and I have to say that you know when I
was asked to give this talk I I really
didn't know how to extract service dog
because you know on one hand I wanted to
say something about their work at the
same time you know there's such a vast
area of um of papers that were produced
by them and that would you know it was
very difficult to find a theme that
would somehow
incorporate everything that they did and
also you know I was kind of biased
because David was
effectively my supervisor back in Oxford
and he is the person who who in many
ways changed my life
um so um
then of course you know through David I
made I met Charlie Bennett and then I
had also a pleasure to meet
Peter and that the two of the three of
them in fact and and and and the
colleagues created a not only they just
made Quantum information science
respectable thing and and deep and
profound subject but also they created a
very peculiar atmosphere in this in this
field so every sort of everyone felt
invited and and and was helped and
somehow this area of quantum information
science is still the area where people
are you know very friendly very willing
to work together and collaborate and
that's sort of a
It Started from the very beginning
um so you know working with David of
course was was was was experienced and I
would have too many anecdotes to tell
but I'm not going to tell them don't
worry David I will
um but it's not only me you know but
also whenever I got a PhD student sooner
or later they sort of moved in the
direction of David and talked to David
about science
um
universe everything in fact you know my
first conversation with David had
nothing to do with quantum physics but
it was all about Carl Poppa and so I
just realized that I found a fellow
poparian in Oxford and I thought yes I
like this guy you know I'm going to work
with him
um but but you know all my students
almost all my students ended up working
with David So Adriano barenko worked on
universality issues
then
Patrick Hayden worked on reformulating
Bell theorem and David Wallace work on
interpretations of probabilities now
Kiara marleto is working on constructive
theories so so in sort of in a way it's
kind of very easy for me to supervise
students in Oxford sooner or later I
said why don't you just go and talk to
David you know and
um
and you know it was already mentioned
that this field exploded over the last
few years
um you know a few at the very beginning
it was pretty much like a family
business there were you know when you
look at this picture that was I don't
know which year it was taken 1993 or so
uh in a in a small place Broadway in in
England it was just you know pretty much
everyone who was working this field at
the time well Charlie may actually give
you a little bit more history at
predating this particular meeting but as
far as I'm concerned you know at that
time when not so many people who were
interested in the quantum aspects of
computation and then it exploded and
many many of those sort of meetings
early meetings in Quantum information
science where
uh David and and Charlie and Peter
attended was in Villa gualino why
villagu Alina Peter asked actually there
was a good reason
um so what happened was that a person
called Giuseppe castanoli who was one of
the directors of lsac that is based in
Torino
I had a friend who was Mario Rossetti
who was responsible for running an
Institute and and Giuseppe castanelli
who
ventured into business but he had some
ideas about Quantum Computing he wanted
to somehow you know sponsor something so
Elsa instead of giving money for yet
another art exhibition in general I
decided to sponsor a series of workshops
in in Quantum information science and
Mario razetti somehow took care of it
from the logistic point of view so um so
I think
indirectly those people shaped this
field and as you could see those
pictures were mostly I think taken by
Charlie who at some point cleverly
um used was I don't know whether it was
Photoshop or whatever he used through
and that but you know various people
came at different times so and Charles
wanted to have them all in the picture
so every now and then you can find them
second of artificial heads popping up so
that
um so that was Charles Charlie wanted
really to have everyone included in in a
true sort of all embracing Spirit of the
field
so which by the way I I remember that
you know once I was invited to give a
lecture and to a popular lecture in
University of Belfast in
so I went to Northern Ireland and I just
gave a talk and I wanted to encourage
everyone to join this field no matter
where you what sort of directions you
are coming from and you know I never use
the word Catholic in terms of word
embracing but that you know at this sort
of subconsciously I said you know come
to this field this is a very Catholic
field
I don't know imagine this environment
so this dog is still Remembered in the
Queen's University
um
anyway so I'm I
when I when I when I thought well should
I really be talking about so I I started
permuting my transparences and I think I
symmetrized my talk so much that this
morning when I sent those slides to
um to the organizers of this meeting I
actually I just I don't know whether
I'll have any real control over this
talk so I'll just I'll just Venture in
the direction or in one aspect of
quantum computational Quantum
information processing has to do with uh
data security which is something that I
had lots of personal interest in now as
it happens for some reason or the other
the development of quantum information
science had an impact on
um on Quantum on on data security to you
know for one thing
Peter's algorithm as you know affects
the security of public key crypto
systems
such as RSA but not only you know for
example if you look at the
cryptocurrency say Bitcoin so the moment
and that the two important components
for the whole thing to work are digital
signatures which are based on elliptic
curves which can be broken with Peter's
algorithm
and there's also that you know the
mining process that can be seriously
affected if you can do Quantum search
for example and uh so so Quantum
technology all those those ideas that
sort of if they were if you know they
have a serious impact on on the future
of uh information
uh security
um so the so in this sort of history of
the development of uh cryptography
that's that you can one can give a
separate lecture on the how it all
started how it all developed how people
wanted to design perfect ciphers and how
most of the time they failed
um and go through the public key crypto
systems ending up with sort of a Quantum
crypto so I'm not going to go into those
details because that's probably not
important but maybe I'll just say a few
words about how we can take the ideas of
Quantum correlations and quantum
entanglement to the extreme
and design a system which comes as close
as one can possibly come to perfectly
secure communication and so so this
so the fact that on one hand when you
have a quantum computer you destroy
public key crypto systems and it's a big
thing now to design possibly new
generation of public key crypto system
that will resist attacks from quantum
computers and they have people as you
probably know National Security Agency
and some other people are looking to
replacement of RSA going in some
directions possibly lattice based
cryptography but another candidate for
that is quantum cryptography of course
so it's uh put it you know what the
quantum taketh away but also the quantum
gives birth in the form of quantum
crypto
so I'm going to talk about you know you
can do Quantum cryptography in in all
kinds of ways uh originally the idea
came from Stephen Wiesner then then
Charlie Bennett and Jill brassard turn
it into Quantum key distribution I had a
slightly different approach based on
quantum entanglement which I will take
not because it is my Approach but
because it has it leads in some way into
um
something that I would consider maybe an
interesting part of
cryptography today devising dependent
cryptography and also
it will take me to some speculations
about Randomness and probability at the
end
so probably
um
most of you know that
for any two individuals to communicate
in a secure way it's probably enough if
they share a private Randomness so if if
the two individuals we always call them
Alice and Bob
have the same random sequence of zeros
and ones and it's known only to them and
not to anyone else then they can build
secure communication very easily out of
this and usually you know in classical
world so to speak it's very easy to
think is randomly
means uniformly distributed but it's
almost impossible to make sure that
those sequences are really unpredictable
so that they are not known to anyone but
Alice and Bob
so this you cannot really do in a in a
non-quantum scenario
the ones you have those uh
random sequences you can communicate for
example using a one-time path which is
one of the oldest crypto systems that
was proposed
and so one way
to to make sure that that that you know
Alice and Bob ended up with the strings
of binary strings of zeros and ones that
are
not known to anyone else is to use the
properties of quantum entanglement and
and explore something that we call
monogamy of entanglement or monogram
monogamy of of quantum correlations it
turns out that if if you generate pairs
of entangled particles the stronger they
are correlated with each other then the
less they are correlated with anything
else
and so you can randomly test and see
that the two entities are really
strongly correlated very very strongly
correlated then by this rule of the
monogamy of
entertainment then there's no
correlation with anything else and
therefore nobody outside those two
entities knows anything about it so one
way to do it is to run
a bell test you know the test that was
designed to test for
the local realism but I'm not
necessarily going in this direction I
just simply use it in a very
instrumental way as something that you
know you you have correlated particles
you measure a certain figure of Merit
they call it the Bell quantity and on
this basis you can
you can decide how secure is the key
that you generated how good it is for
cryptographic purposes so that's kind of
an old story
but then you know at this point you say
fine so you generated the key you can
assess how good it is but you know it's
it's all just you know
the question of implementations all good
crypto systems fantastic crypto systems
usually fail because of some lousy
implementation so can you then somehow
deal with the fact that experimental
implementations may not be perfect can
you somehow counteract on this
um so um oops
so that you know this is actually not a
sort of a
pld hypothetical questions because there
are experimental colleagues
who actually
exploit the imperfections in
implementations of of quantum
cryptography and that's that's a good
work so the kind of quantum hackers
um so I just pick up this photograph
from Vladimir Makarov who is probably
the most known Quantum hacker so so the
guy is making very clever
experimentalist who knows that currently
you cannot really Implement all those
things ideally and therefore
he is using his tool his famous suitcase
that you can see here and to um
crack some
supposedly secure and Quantum key
distribution methods but you know in
fact
you can
and you you can
[Music]
deal with the situations where you have
imperfections as long as you can reach
the level of implementation of those
build inequalities which are called sort
of the the loophole free test so so if
you reach a certain Precision level
and
with the deductions and with setting up
this experiment in a certain way then
what what is interesting is that the
hardware doesn't matter anymore
it's just by correlation alone you can
by measuring the degree of correlations
alone
you can say whether something is secure
or not so in other words there's no you
know there are no side channels to this
game
we refer to this as a device independent
of course you know in order to do this
there are there are a few assumptions so
one of them is that
that Alice and Bob the two people who
want to establish this cryptographic key
have access to some truly local
random number generators
so so just just to to be sure so I'm
talking about a scenario where Alice and
Bob
can then
purchase devices from
you know some kind of a dodgy dealer who
who comes to them and say look I'm I'm
I'm selling you those at some discounted
price those are good Quantum devices and
you can distribute cryptographically and
you don't trust this person at all but
nonetheless if you take those devices
you can without knowing really what they
are doing as long as they generate
correlations up to a certain degree
you don't care what is inside you just
simply say okay fine I can use those
correlations to generate cryptographic
cubes so that's sort of a beauty of this
result so in order to do this in order
to run this test the first you have to
also rely that you have a source of
truly random
numbers locally and so so the that would
work as long as you can trust those
random number generators that you have
and to that Alice and Bob have to the
disposal otherwise it wouldn't work very
well so now the the most dangerous
scenario in this case is that you have
this device independent system but so
you purchase this device those devices
from from someone whom you don't trust
that is by mistake you also purchase a
random number generator from that person
so that that unfortunately wouldn't work
so somehow you have to make sure that
your local Randomness your local random
number generators are either
devices that that you can trust or those
are um
or you can do something about it so
for example you can just purchase a
Quantum random number generator and plug
in but you know those kind of random
number generators that you can get today
are probably not good because you know
even if you get those random number
generators you also would like to
usually you don't produce them yourself
you would just get them you also would
like to self-test
do some kind of run some kind of a
simple test and see whether those random
number generators are genuine that you
can trust them so the question is can it
be done
um
so this brings us to sort of like
a question that is basically the
question that I want to address here is
is of this time so given a
so suppose you want to get a random
number generator and you are given a
someone brings you a black box
and says well you know go ahead and use
this random generator for cryptographic
purposes
would you be able to check that this
random number generator is doing what
it's supposed to be doing
so what do you request from this random
number generator so you you would like
the string of zeros and one that is
generated is such that you know that
that's a uniform distribution that the
frequency of zeros and one is the same
the frequency of all pairs and subsets
of zeros and ones is the same this you
can test so those are sort of the
regular
classical
well-established as for Randomness but
there's more if you want to use it for
cryptography that you also like to test
that this is a truly unpredictable
that there's no copy of this device
in a situation where someone would just
generate two identical random number
generators and one would be stored and
would generate exactly the same sequence
and it will pass you know you look at
yours and it will just pass all the
statistical tests for for Randomness but
in fact it's not a private Randomness so
this is not unpredictable because there
is a person somewhere who can actually
tell exactly what kind of randoms you
are getting there
so so today when you buy a random number
generator
and you want to use it say for
cryptographic purposes usually it comes
with some kind of certificate
um because you know you you yourself as
the end user you just you you open this
box you may look inside and you don't
understand the physics there's lots of
electronics and gadgets then you don't
know what's going on so how do you know
you can you wouldn't know basically so
you you basically ask for a certain
certifying authority to let you know
whether this device is good or not so
for example I'm showing you one of
quantum random number generators here
that is
that is produced by a company called ID
Quantic and usually when you get it you
can get a certification from relevant
Swiss agencies saying yeah you know
we look into this and we can certify
that it's done and produce and in such
and such way that it it generates a
Randomness that is kind of a private
Randomness to the best of our knowledge
right
the question I'm asking now is it but
you know you may not trust those
authorities and if you sort of like a
bit contrarian as I am you may not trust
the governments you may not trust the
authorities so you would try to test
yourself whether whether this device
does what it's supposed to be doing
and
so the question is can you do it
one thing you may consider is you know
computer scientists have all kinds of
ideas how to amplify Randomness how to
take something that is less private for
example and make it a bit more private
so you can use privacy amplification for
example
and
but we know that basically
even sort of a source of Randomness that
is not good most the really
there are really no classical way of
improving a certain class of randomly
for example in computer science
popular sources of Randomness that
computer scientists study are called the
center of as Irani sources and it's
known that
the is basically
no way there's no classical
Randomness
there's no classical processing of this
Randomness that would allow you to
expand it or to make it more private so
it's a well-established result
however you know if you then construct
the
random you know this can be bypassed by
using again monogamous correlation so if
you design a Quantum random number
generator in such a way that it can you
can just you know get uh
two outputs and you can measure the
correlations between those two outputs
and then basically pretty much by the
same argument about the monogamy of
entanglement or monogamy of certain
correlation
relation you can then sample from one of
the outputs and be actually quite
confident that that as long as there's a
little bit of true randomness
in in your input and you can amplify it
and and get a device that gives you not
only uniformly distributed but also
completely private sources of Randomness
so so basically pretty much it is pretty
much the case that even if you get a
lousy random number generator that you
don't trust
with a little bit of um
post-processing you know using using
this in in locally you can actually
amplify this Randomness up to your
satisfaction
um
and then you know there are many ways of
doing this I'm
I think I just wanted
to say that you know you can use all
kinds of belly inequalities not only the
most popular chsh inequality but but but
you know the story basically is
at the moment if you if you if you take
this path to secrecy where you use
quantum entanglement you can show not
only that
by testing for correlations for
monogamous correlations you can you can
get devices that
you can test for security of of the data
that you obtain you can
also you know test for
the sources of the local Randomness so
that means that you can push the concept
of privacy very much to your own domain
so it's basically you don't have to know
anything about the underlying physics in
this device all you have to do is just
to make some statistical tests and no
matter what is the underlying physics
that you will be able at least to make
statements about privacy of this data
which is actually quite remarkable but
you know so this is actually the story
where if you want to push cryptography
or the the story of privacy to the
limits this is basically where we can
where we are today at least you know at
a very speculative way I mean I'm not
saying that this is actually implemented
we we can just about implement
uh local free test of the real
inequalities and what is interesting
though is is that in my view you know
even though I can I like this narrative
and I can develop it into some more
coherent and I can give no technical or
more consistent review of this field
quite often when I do this I feel that
you know there's a little bit of a
superficial approach to this and somehow
we are cheating at some level because
it's it's you know very nice
mathematically it's sort of simplified
but if you go to the bottom of it I
don't think it is it is as simple as
that there's lots of you know lots of
interesting questions or fundamental
questions that you can ask for example
you know those input output boxes surely
it is not the case that they're just
mathematical devices and the real
physical things and if you look at them
and they have to be Quantum and the
question is you know how do you operate
this and how do you understand the whole
notion of secrecy in terms of
um say the average
um
Multiverse where where if you assume for
example that everything is quantum then
then you have to somehow redefine the
notion of secrecy in terms of
relations between different universes so
that you know how
the information in in one particular
part of the Multiverse is restricted by
by people sort of but you know the
access how the access is sort of
restricted by different in different
parts of the Multiverse so that's that's
certainly one thing and
and then you know there's a whole thing
about the randomness the randomness
always provoked lots of interesting
discussions uh going back to the past
you know the question was well is it is
it really objective things do do we have
truly random phenomena in nature
and so that would be um
you know um
point of view taken by say
epicurus who would say yeah atoms you
know swear if every now and then so
there's no predetermined thing and you
know that was sort of uh perhaps on the
other side of the spectrum was
Democritus who was saying well you know
it's more subjective things atoms follow
predetermined paths and it's just what
is random is due to the lack of your
knowledge Maybe
um you know take this discussion where
you want but the question is it is still
irrelevant because if if indeed it is
the case that
everything is quantum then you know what
is really Randomness in this sort of
truly Quantum universe and and does it
exist at all and and it may be the case
that that it doesn't in fact probably I
would like to finish with this statement
from David I took it from the New
Scientist article you gave this
interview and I think you really said
this did you
[Applause]
right so so you know it's it's just you
know a valid question at this point uh
to go in that direction and think how
the whole discussion the historical
think about the randomness and
probabilities is going to end up so do
we can we can we develop for example
physics where we don't use the notion of
Randomness and probabilities as we as we
do it today which is a very interesting
question
um and I think I will
I will probably stop at this point
because as you could see it was sort of
like
the talk where he was trying probably to
take this notion of security and the
idea of pushing
um
privacy to the limits
creates generates lots of interesting
questions in fundamental questions and I
think what is great about this field is
the fact that somehow more and more
often we can address those uh questions
in in rather Technical and precise
language so again I would like to
congratulates uh
Harley David and Peter for helping to
create this Fantastic Field and and this
needless to say this field will
certainly Thrive for years to come thank
you very much
[Applause]
thank you very much Hector thank you for
the very inspiring presentation very
questions
yes yes sure well reminiscence because
I've taken a lot of these group
conference pictures and one of the main
reasons is that is that uh scientists in
general are like herding cats so you
announce there's a group picture and a
lot of the people miss it and then you
want to include them and I was I don't
know if you were at that one that we had
a conference in in Capri and there was a
beautiful swimming pool and a lot of
people failed to show up for the group's
picture which was around the swimming
pool so I took them later on and then
they just cut their heads and had them
floating around in the water
that's
it
okay so uh well I'm sure that there's
plenty of things to think about after
these presentations but there is coffee
outside we are running very well on time
so there is a 15 minutes for coffee and
we come back at 4 15. let's say thank
Arthur again
[Applause]
foreign
okay or just in the pocket okay
foreign okay great
and let's see
I was here
[Applause]
all right
now
[Applause]
it's like a beautiful way of the
punchline
foreign
okay so now we will move to the next
part of the of the event which is
awarding the medals and and the
presentations of the three hour days so
I will start with the Peter Shore so let
me say some words about Peter he
received his BS in mathematics in 1981.
for undergraded work at Caltech and was
a Putnam fellow in 1978 here his PhD in
Applied Mathematics from MIT in 1985.
physics was a probabilistic analysis of
impacting ideal revenues
Peter boosted the field of a Quantum
computation by designing efficient
Quantum algorithms
for factoring large numbers and
Computing discrete logarithms
Each of which can be used to break
Classical encryptum schemes
he does proved that a quantum computer
could solve a useful hard computational
problem is financially faster than any
known classical computer algorithm
sure also introduced Quantum ever
correcting codes and fall tolerant
Quantum computation which are scheme for
copying with the effects of straight
interactions noise is disturbing qubits
qubits
without robust Quantum error correction
large-scale Quantum computation could be
estimated by the extreme sensitivity of
quantum Estates to noise
instead the theory of quantum ever
correction is now a well-established
branch of quantum information size and
the difficult path to developing large
scale quantum computers appears open
and Peter will give the presentation and
that the variable will be I will just
read it the discovery of the factoring
algorithm but before that I will
as a people to come here to I can give
you the the the direct middle and
everybody to give him a worm award
[Music]
[Applause]
thank you
foreign
okay
[Applause]
so I want to
um you know talk about you know they
write inspiration for discovering the
factoring metal and some reminiscence is
about you know what
took place when I discovered it around
20 years ago
so the outline of my talk is first I
want to give the first few slides of my
1990s driving talk
somewhat updated because well
they'll show you know why factoring
Alvin was such a surprise and then I'm
going to say a few words about how I
discovered attacking algorithm and then
I'm going to say a few words about what
happened after I discovered it so first
the slide open my question
what is the difference between a
computer and physics experiment
of course back then
what's the difference between an
elephant and an egg
you know so obvious
so first answer
experiment is a big custom built finicky
piece of apparatus and the computer is a
little box that fits in your briefcase
so for example and you can see neither
of these existed 20 years ago when I
discovered the factory oh here is a
computer and here is a physics
experiment
years before that
here is a computer oops and here is a
physics experiment and they start
looking very much more
and you can even see that the
technicians wearing the same uniform
so
if you're interested this is the
Berkeley particle accelerator and this
is iniak
first computer that online worked on
so here's the second answer a visit a
computer okay
a computer answers mathematical
questions and a physics experiment
answers physical Industries so for
example
if you want to test whether all bodies
fall at the same rate you probably don't
want to use computers
and if you want to test whether 15 you
might be wonderful find 15 equals x
times y you probably don't want to use
physics experiments so this is um an ion
trap computer
Reiner blots group in Innsbruck Austria
where he actually did the experiment of
factoring 15 using an iandra
and
I'm always afraid when these papers come
out that some
headline is going to appear in a
newspaper somewhere physicists spend two
million dollars show that 15 equals five
times three
and a third answer
is that you don't need to build a new
computer for each mathematical question
you want answered and this is really a
very
actually it's a fundamental
fact about validation
and what that means is that you can Mass
compute produce computers
well it's hard to mass produce physics
experience so for example after the
tebatron
um
yes solved all the Practical physics
questions of this capable of
people built the LHC
and
you know when the LHC solves
when people discover all the physics
they can at the LHC
they're going to have to come up with a
lot of money to build a new one or stop
running practical accelerator experience
so
no one would think of building more than
one at Lake City because that would be
really
and then there's a lot of physics
condensed matter physics of the LHC is
completely useless for whereas if you
have one big computer
you can pretty much run any mathematical
problem you want on it
and this is related to the universality
of computation so back in the 1930s
there were three people there was Alonso
church Alan Turing and cleaney and they
all had completely different looking
definitions of computation what does it
mean for a function to be compatible
but it turned out they gave the exact
same price
clashable functions
and what church and Turing proposed was
that this was really a very natural
class of computational functions
but when people started building real
computers
this turns out that the definition of
computational
for definition for a function to be
computable really wasn't that useful in
practice for example if you have a
function that can be solved computed in
10 to the 30th years
well for practical purposes it might as
well be uncomputable
so computer scientists made this
rather
from some points of view it's probably
Draconian compromise between 30th
practice where they came up with the
idea that efficient means it can be
computable in polynomial time and the
length of its input
so
I mean it's not really
um doesn't really correspond to it
typically computable functions but it's
also something that computer scientists
could prove the remnants about
so once you know this
where it was realized once you have the
definition of efficient as being
computational time
this church quantitative Church's thesis
which
you know was proposed
many different times in 1960s by various
computer scientists but I think carbon
is actually the first
you know a turing machine can perform
efficiently any computation that any
device can perform efficiently
and
I don't know how widely recognized was
that this is really a statement about
this
rather than
computation rather than a mathematics
like in fact if you have different laws
of physics you might be able to compute
different things efficiently
David Deutsche was one of the people to
point out I believe were several other
people who pointed out
number of years before he did
so if quantum computers can be built
the really surprising thing is that this
would imply this folk thesis is not true
and the fact this book thesis has
the colonial has a really
um become rooted in the consciousness of
the public because
one of the questions I get asked got
asked
according computers was well how much
faster is a quantum computer than a
classical computer
and this isn't really
oh very boring
an answerable question because quantum
computers speed up some problems
by exponential amounts and they speed up
other computational problems not at all
so
this you know the fact that this
misconception is so widespread it really
means that the public had absorbed
quantity Church's thesis
I think we have now gotten to the point
where we have convinced the public that
quantum computers don't just speed up
everything
by one number
that was you know that took a long time
planning to do
so part two what led up to the discovery
so my first exposure to Quantum
Computing was when I heard it talk by
Charlie Bennett
about Quantum key distribution here is
because I'm sure that Charlie is going
to mention this in this talk Charlie and
Don smolen
built
layout of you know
basically on a tiny budget a little
modern key distribution device
and this apparently is what it took for
them to get physicists to take them
seriously
so um
I you know I was very intrigued by
Charlie battle's result and I went
around and looked at papers about
Quantum Computing
um
in the um literature and there really
were not very many of them and most of
them were written by David Deutsch
so
looking at them
first neither Charlie nor David Deutsch
convinced me that there was a
mathematical rigorous description of
quantum Computing you know looking back
at David's papers in retrospect I was
clearly wrong about that
no and I also was not convinced at all
that it was at all useful
I was wrong about that too but um
that was um
I don't think David's papers had to be
really useful algorithms in them
so for that next thing that happened is
Umesh vasrani gave a talk and Bella
asked about the paper Quantum complexity
theory he wrote with Ethan Bernstein
and this had two
really great inventions in it first it
had a problem which was a problem that
no one would actually really ever want
to solve
but which quantum computers really sped
up the computation of a classical
computers
and the other thing is it had a rigorous
definition of a Quantum returning
machine
so after I saw
umesh's talk I started thinking
seriously about Quantum Computing and
whether it would be
possible to speed up some
real problems with quantum computers
but I didn't get anything aware with
this until I saw Diane Simon's paper
so I was on the conference program
committee and Dan Simon had submitted
the paper containing his algorithms to
this conference in fact it was stocked
in 1994 which occurred sometimes in the
spring
so I thought I was very interested in it
and I'm very embarrassed to say that the
conference program committee rejected it
so I was not able to perform swayed the
committee that this was a big enough
Advance over
um
baserati and Ethan Bernstein's paper
which had appeared in a previous
iteration of
this conference
so
um
I mean in retrospect clearly I should
have been jumping up and down and
yelling at them that this was the
biggest mistake you could ever make but
I didn't know that at the time and I was
um
didn't go
I didn't jump up and down and I voted to
reject it
so what is Dan Simon's algorithm well it
takes place on a hypercube so you have
hybrid Cube and you color the point you
color the points
producing the hybrid crew with one of
two to the N minus one colors so there
are exactly two colors are two points
labeled with each color
and these points have to be periodic so
to get from a green point to the other
Green Point to say what you do is you
take the vertical horizontal and right
diagonal Edge
and
let's try that with a different point
vertical horizontal right diagonal Edge
that gets us to the same color and here
vertical horizontal
right diagonal the second color
so now you have this high Cube
all these colors on it
and what you're allowed to do is you're
allowed to ask
on what color is this point
and you want to find this
from one
point of a color to another point of the
color
now classically
the only thing you can do
keep asking
random vertices or maybe
nearly random vertices you can do a
little bit better than random until you
get two vertices of the same color
and then you're done because you know
what the path looks like
Quantum mechanically
so that takes the number of points on
the hybrid Cube which is you know 2 to
the D minus one if this is D dimensional
hybrid Cube
and one mechanically you can really
solve it in D queries
um you ask any questions of points in
superposition
and you get
enough information to tell you
the
answer what the um distances
so that's an exponential speed up
Simon's algorithm really gave me all the
hints I needed to discover well the
discrete log outcome
squeak logs
curiosity
Finance album have Purity it's mod 2
discrete log algorithm uses the Fourier
transform assignments algorithm uses the
Fourier transform its mod
V2 to the N instead of
the integers mod Z
integers mod
I guess
some number
but you know I knew the discrete problem
would be solved by using curiosity
Simon's algorithm used periodicity and I
started thinking about it and eventually
I figured out how to do it
well first no how does the factory
algorithm work
you can think of the factoring algorithm
as a computational interparameter or
maybe a computational diffraction rating
so what a diffraction grading does is it
has a lot of lines on it and when you
shine
um
colored light
the angle that reflects off our
angle it makes when it goes through the
diffraction fighting it depends on the
color and that's because at certain
angles all the wavelengths add up
so you get constructive interference and
all the other angles the wavelengths
don't add up so you get destructive
interference so the the colors are
separated by the angle they make coming
out of the diffraction grating
and the quantum Fourier transform really
does the same thing for a periodic
function
separates the different possible periods
of the periodic function so each
different period results in a different
output
the quantitor and then from the output
you can figure out the period
and if you know
some basic number three which is well
known to equipment Crypt analysts
you can turn factoring into a problem of
binding of period of a function
okay so what happened after the
Discovery Well
so the news of this spread
amazingly fast so this was
I gave a talk at Reliance about the
algorithm for discrete log on a Tuesday
in April 1994. the next weekend
called me I was home embedded with a bad
cold and he asked that I hear you can
factor in a quantum computer and tell me
how it works
so you can notice that the talk was
about the discrete mode problem
algorithm and I had not actually solved
the factory algorithm
and
[Applause]
well I don't know if you know the
childhood game of telephone but somehow
the result turned to factoring
in hinoki
both telling each other about it
um
the five days there and in those five
days I have managed to solve factoring
as well
so I could tell Umesh
and the News spread remarkably fast
getting you know email requests for the
paper
and
[Music]
so there were lots of different versions
of
various
um drafts of the paper
spreading around and people kept you
know kept asking me questions about
outdated drafts which I had to answer by
sending them the latest draft
and um in May
which was only a few weeks after I
discovered the factory album I gave a
talk at the algorithmic number 30
Symposium and Cornell in June Umesh gave
a talk at a Santa Fe Institute
um conference on Quantum information
and August I gave a talk at a conference
and missed and I guess Arthur Eckert
gave a talk in Colorado on
Atomic Optics conference
and in October I gave topic Villa
gualino and Torino
and
by that time the paper was actually
written I presented it at the fox
conference that November which Dan
Simon's paper also got into that
conference luckily
and um
red
and one interesting thing is that I
started describing quantum computers as
Quantum Turing machines which was what
Bernstein baserati paper talked about
but you know after I discovered the
result I started talking to physicists
it's absolutely impossible to explain
the quantum returning machine to a
physicist they they had to understand it
because it's you know mathematics it
doesn't really correspond to any
actual experiment
so I started using the quantum circuit
model instead which I think was first
described by David deluge
and um
really how the quantum circuit model got
to be the accepted model for Quantum
computation
and let's see I'm probably out of time
is that right
am I out of time
okay so one objection to the factoring
result was if you needed to do 10 to the
ninth steps on
each gate had to be accurate to one part
in 10 to the ninth
of course this is completely out of the
question experimentally
and one of the biggest
um
detractors of quantum computation was
Rolf landauer who worked at the same
place that Charlie Bennett and David
divincenzo and some other people working
on Quantum computation and I think
both landauer described the situation
there is well we have four people
working on Quantum computation and one
person working against comp of quantum
computation
so there are you know
so
what's the argument well
quantum computers can't be made fault
tolerant you can't use redundancy
because of the node cluttering theorem
which says if you start with a Quantum
State you can't make another copy of it
can't measure to see if there's an error
because the Heisenberg is uncertainty
principle means that if you measure the
quantum computation you inevitably
disturb it and then of course if if the
computation is Disturbed it won't give
you the right answer
so the resolution of this is
show that Quantum error prepping codes
exist
and quantum computers can be made fault
tolerant by using them
and how do they work well you arrange
the codes so that likely errors are
orthogonal to the encoded state and what
that means is you can measure the errors
without disturbing the encoded statement
and once you've measured the errors you
can correct the errors
oh
with this there are fault tolerant
special theorems which say you only need
Gates accurate to maybe one part and 10
to the fourth
this number really depends on the exact
Quantum while tolerant techniques you
use
and it's still
still unresolved as to
what
this number should be if you
try to make a quantum computers in you
know fault color without using too much
overhead
so this is still very difficult
experimentally but in the last few years
various groups are coming really close
to this number
very um encouraging
and um that's this is my last slide so
thank you
[Applause]
I think Karen must be good
very nice piece of History it's a
beautiful way to see how the things
develop any questions any one comment or
question
potato yes
okay so
um there's a question from a YouTube
viewer
for Peter so what are the most
significant reasons to think that
factoring cannot be performing
polynomial time on a classical computer
apart from the fact that many people
have failed to do so or
um well actually I don't think there are
that many reasons
if you talk to um Peter sarnak who's
one of the most famous and best number
theorists around he thinks it's entirely
possible there's a polynomial time
algorithm for factoring on a Quantum on
a classical computer
so the real only the only the I mean the
only real reason we don't think there is
one is that nobody has discovered it yet
and we think that we're smart enough
that it existed it would have been
discovered which
[Music]
foreign
intellectual leader in Quantum
information science born in 1943 in New
York City
he earned a BS in chemistry from Brian
Das University in 1964 and received his
PhD from Harvard in 1970 for molecular
Dynamic studies computer simulations of
molecular motion
and Harvard he worked for James Watson
one year as a teaching assistant about
the genetic code for the next two years
he continued his This research under any
Soul Raman at argon Laboratory
after joining IPM research in 1972 he
built on the work of IBM's Rolf landauer
to show that general purpose computation
can be performed by logically and
thermodynamically reversible apparatus
a little bit at the small carbon here
that
I have just
added in 1982 he
he proposed every interpretation of
Maxwell's demon
attributing its inability to break the
second lot to the demo
so to the thermodynamic cost of this
choice in rather than acquiring
information
[Music]
and um
with the Jill's brasser sorry
something is happening are you receiving
emails
I think it is from the University of
Montreal I think I have to mention
Bennett invented Quantum cryptography
where two distant parties share a secret
a secret encryption key with security
from Evers ifs droppers guaranteed by
the basic Quantum limitations on
measurements of incompatible obserables
collaborators also introduced quantum
teleportation
whereby entanglement and classical
singers are used to transfer Quantum
states he and co-workers proved that a
quantity called The Voice entropy is the
proper measure of entanglement of for
Pure systems an early result in the
quantification of entanglement which
continues to be an active area of
research
so please show me to
[Applause]
okay and then then Charles will give us
a presentation building a culture of
quantum information
yeah so I'm very glad to be here I was
here I think in the 1980s with with
Ralph landauer and it's a place where
serious physics has been done for a long
time uh I'm going to talk about the
culture of quantum of really the culture
of information science because
when you uh
when you well like like well I say other
parts of mathematics information science
was an abstraction from practical
experience but uh
and and the the
information revolution that we're still
in the middle of is is from these two
brilliant I mean almost brutal
abstractions by uh touring of the idea
of a of a hardware independent notion of
computing and by Shannon the and even
more brutal idea that uh that uh that
there the theory of communication is
best developed by ignoring the meaning
of messages
uh something they they did a tremendous
uh service to humanity by making these
brutal abstractions but they were a
little bit too brutal they left out a
couple of uh essentially mathematical
Pro
uh properties which they thought were
just physical stuff that wasn't really
necessary to think about and these uh
were the uh reversibility
questions of reversibility which leads
it looked they thought were
thermodynamic questions of not really
much importance and superposition uh
which was the idea that was left out of
touring's theory when he thought of it
as a theory of computation these were
both uh I mean in all of the 20th
century scientists were were pretty they
knew about quantum mechanics they've
been around for a while and they
certainly knew about thermodynamics have
been around for over a century but uh
they just thought that wasn't so
important
well conventionally
the information carriers are what a
physicist would call a classical system
their states are reliably
distinguishable and you can measure it
without disturbing them and then to
specify the joint state of two objects
like what's in my left pocket and what's
in my right pocket is sufficient and and
sometimes necessary to describe the
states of of both each one separately
but of course Quantum systems don't
behave that way of
but for most of the 20th century this
was regarded as kind of a nuisance
because people focused on the
uncertainty principle causing Quantum
systems to behave less reliably than
than larger systems and now as as we've
heard from from from
several of the speakers today uh there
are positive consequences of quantum
mechanics for information processing
now the first that I found out about it
is by my conversation with Stephen
Wiesner who is my college classmate
and he had some ideas that
things you could do with information
that were not covered by Shannon's
Theory one of them was to combine two
messages into a form where if you
transmitted that message you could
nowadays we'd say Multiplex them
together
so that the receiver can receive either
one of them but not both now that's
impossible in Shannon's Theory because
you just make a copy and you decrypt it
one way and you decrypt it the other way
so this the idea that the uncopyability
of quantum information was something
that could be useful uh the other one
was even more direct
application of that idea the quantum
banknote that could not be copied now I
guess I don't think the Euro notes have
this but uh French and German magnos
used to have print fine print explaining
how many years in prison you would spend
if you would copy the duplicated the
notes well anyway some I think this
he
wrote it in a manuscript which didn't
get published until 15 years later about
this in 1968 actually uh and I think he
I think he submitted it to IEEE but then
didn't follow up on it because he became
interested in sort of political activism
and not in in physics for another decade
so
uh but I think this
that I took on in 1970 with him maybe
the first place where the notion of
quantum information Theory or the name
even got mentioned so then I went around
talking to other people including David
and and and and and we we've heard a lot
of the other the rest of the uh history
but of course in the beginning days it's
sort of
it's sort of obvious that these were
ideas that were so strange that most
people even the people who are working
on them didn't take them very seriously
like Peter just said oh well I was only
working on it part-time
uh
so what's the what's
what's the difference between ordinary
information and Quantum information
people often ask me this
and I I sort of tried to say well if you
if you think of a space of four
dimensions then you can explain the
notion of an entangled state but this
doesn't work very well at a dinner party
uh so I came up with this other metaphor
that Quantum information is like the
information in a dream
uh if you try to explain what your dream
to somebody else you forget the dream
and only remember what you said about it
uh and of course this means you can lie
about your dream and not get caught
unless you're trying to lie to your
spouse uh but unlike dreams there's a
a well-known and well understood theory
of how the quantum information behaves
and that's what the people in our field
have been developing for the last
several decades and it's really exciting
because it's the right
oh this is a very arrogant statement to
say it's the right basis for the theory
of communication and computation well
it's a better basis than what we had
before
thanking touring and Shannon for what
they did we made a an important
Improvement which
may not be important yet in in a
technological sense but in a conceptual
sense it's really an improvement
oh but there so one of the concept one
of the things that came out of this is
that physicists and chemists used to
think of quantum mechanics as part of
their subject and when when computer
scientists and and people that I'm not
sure exactly what you'd call them like
David began thinking about it
uh they were realizing it was very
parallel to the theory of classical
Computing just as all classical
information can be reduced to bits all
Quantum information can be reduced to
qubits and you only have to work on them
one and two at a time in order to do any
computation so this idea of a universal
I think that's David's idea a universal
quantum computer as as an idea that's as
crisp and and fruitful as the universal
classical computer that Turing showed
existed
foreign
so here's a
here's an example of something you can
do with a quantum computer uh
we can take a
there it is oops I went I want the laser
yeah
yeah so let's take a like a vertical
photon is a one and a horizontal Photon
at zero and I have in different colors
so that I can keep track of them this is
a a conditional uh
not operation or a a exclusive or so the
first the first qubit controls whether
the second one is left alone or whether
it's flipped and you put the first qubit
in in the intermediate Quantum State you
get an intermediate State between both
of them being horizontal and both of
them being vertical and that's an
entangled state that has no analog In
classical Theory
so you could say it's a state of
sameness of polarization even though
neither Photon has a polarization of
itself well that's an idea that that uh
would would bother a typical computer
scientist of the 1980 very badly and
they would say you know you you
physicists don't even prove theorem so
how can I take what you're saying
seriously but actually at an earlier
time in my my life I was in in the
Haight Ashbury District of San Francisco
in 1967 and there it was easy to find
people who thought they were perfectly
in tune with you even though they had no
opinion about anything
um
now the uh the hippies believe that with
enough LSD everybody could be perfectly
in tune with
everybody else but they were they were
not really especially good at
mathematics uh and now we have a
quantitative theory of of quantum
information we know that entanglement is
monogamous and the more entangled two
systems are with each other Christmas
hippies weren't very good at monogamy
either uh so here's how it works if we
have two uh two perfectly and we'll get
two separate systems we go through a
very simple Quantum operation and we can
get an entangled state
and then suppose Bob likes the fact that
he's entangled with Alice and he decides
well let's let's have a little bit more
of this so he entangles himself with
Judy
uh well the trouble with that is that
that degrades his his entanglement with
Alice and his entangled Judy so he's
only classically correlated with each of
them but uh and so that means if either
of them leaves town he just has a
classical correlation that could be
cloned or copied or you know but it's
not very interesting uh but and more
interesting thing happens if they both
stay in town and that is that he becomes
entangled with the now and non-trivial
relationship between the two of them
that he's brought about which I would
say is an appropriate punishment
and so now we've developed a quantum
theory of information and information
processing we have to explain what we
mean by classical bits and a classical
bit is just one a bit with one of two
arbitrary or orthogonal values the
classical wire is something that
conducts uh classical information
reliably but spoils superpositions in
other words it's a Quantum wire with an
eavesdropper and a classical computer is
just a quantum computer that's
handicapped by having eavesdroppers on
all its wires so instead of saying why
does a quantum computer speed up
computations unless
a sensible way of asking that question
is why do some computations get horribly
slowed down by having eavesdropping on
on every step of the way
so uh entanglement is ubiquitous why uh
almost every interaction between two
systems produces entanglement why wasn't
it discovered until the 20th century
well because of monogamy most systems in
nature other than little ones like
photons interact so strongly with their
environments as to become entangled with
them almost immediately and that means
that the relation between the parts of
the system is degraded to Mere classical
correlation it's a little bit like the
life of celebrities where you know they
if you read the People magazine you find
out what they had for breakfast and then
you read the next issue of People
magazine you find out what they had for
lunch and so they had no private life
because they're being eavesdropped on
continuously
well how does entanglement hide itself
this is sort of a quick version of
decoherence theory in the version of
proposed by uh voychic Zurich uh and it
says as most systems in the kind of
world we inhabit are continually
eavesdropped on by multiple different
eavesdroppers for example the photons of
light are bouncing off all of us and
some of them are going out the window
and never coming back and they certainly
don't interact with each other
afterwards so what happens is it for a
typical thing in our world other than
this microscopic thing the environment
eavesdrops on it and creates multiple
redundant copies of some properties
while obfuscating other properties
uh now it was this is this is I think
Peter already talked about this in In
classical computation you can break all
computations down into ants and ores and
Knots but you may need a lot of them to
do a problem like this factoring problem
and if you had a quantum computer you
could do it much faster
uh
and we have now a well-developed theory
of quantum computational complexity
where we have your origin our earlier
theory of classical complexity classes
like P and NP and we've got the new
Quantum ones that sort of interpolate
between them in an interesting way
that's still being being explored
now I'm going to go back and talk a
little bit about the the way ideas
develop in a way that's not in a
straightforward way in fact bad ideas
are sometimes extremely good for
advancing scientific progress and good
ideas sometimes slow it down
so and one of the biggest source of bad
ideas was Einstein
so Einstein really didn't like quantum
mechanics and because he's the the the
only 20th century scientist most people
can name uh they they have the attitude
that if Einstein didn't like it and
didn't understand it what hope is there
for me oh
well
now we know he was wrong and I would say
I although I'm not really a historian of
science at all I think his mistake was
the viewing entanglement as action at a
distance
uh it's some kind of influence of one
one particle on another and the right
way is uh to think about it as an
entangled state is that you have to give
up the the common sense idea that if the
hole is in a definite State then each
part must be in it it's just not true
and then once you once you've given up
that idea it's quite possible to
understand how you can have this strong
correlation uh which uh
which doesn't mean that either particle
is influencing the other now but many
people continue to follow this bad path
and I think in the in the early 80s Nick
Herbert published a paper well actually
he submitted it I forgot if it was Asher
Paris may have been the the uh referee
and he said this paper is is so wrong
that we must publish it immediately
and it turned out to be the right thing
to do because it stimulated the
refutation of the idea that entanglement
can be used for long distance
communication uh
so
but there's there's a
so this gives you the idea that wrong
ideas are very good for scientific
progress so conversely and I'm going to
be talking about this in the context of
the reversibility and Maxwell's demon
uh good ideas indeed quantum mechanics
itself sometimes scientific
progress
so when we think about the idea between
anal between mathematics and physics
between dynamical motion and uh
and
oh
in the computation and this is very
nicely stated by LaPlace in 1814 that is
that if the universe has deterministic
laws if we know the present State they
would know the entire future in the past
uh
well
the next problem came up in connection
with the Maxwell's demon who who here
has heard of Maxwell's demon
okay well this was an idea of the
discovery really of of the of the
mathematics of random motion of atoms in
the gas
uh and he said if you had somebody who
was able to to look at the gas molecules
you could get all the hot ones on one
side and all the cold ones on the other
side or you could collect them all on
one side and you could violate the
second law of Thermodynamics and he sort
of as my uh
of science writer colleague Ira fruit
Aya fruta in in Japan puts it Maxwell
didn't solve the problem he just gave it
as a homework assignment to physicists
after that now
actually the time was right right at the
beginning of the 20th century for
someone to solve this problem and it was
Smokey uh and he considered a version of
the Maxwell demon problem which was just
a trapdoor so that the molecules coming
from one side
could push the door open but if they hit
the door from the other side they
couldn't go through and eventually all
the gas would collect on the right and
you could run your pneumatic drill and
make holes in the street with it for
just using the energy of heat uh and
then he argued that if the door was
light and enough and the spring on it
was small enough that it could be pushed
open by molecule it would have its own
random motion and it would work in
Reverse exactly as often as it worked
forward so we really solved a problem
back in 1912 but uh
then quantum mechanics happened and
people realized that measurement was a
problematical thing which they thought
was a straightforward thing and then
somehow they got timid in a way that I
don't understand which is the LaPlace
already imagined that everything in the
universe including all of our thoughts
are mechanistic and now but by the mid
20th century after quantum mechanics had
discovered people started worrying if an
intelligent being could somehow do
something that that a trapped or
couldn't do so zillard's paper in 1929
was uh
it was actually mathematically and
physically correct but it got gave
people a lot of wrong ideas because of
its title and because it didn't quite
clearly stay in words as well as in the
equations why the demon doesn't work and
finally it was felt to Ralph landauer to
say that computation could be reversible
and it was an irreversible Act of
erasing information that kept keeps the
demon from working
so here's my uh sermon the sermon part
of this history thing basic science in
the future haste makes waste scientific
progress I think is mostly incremental
rather than breakthroughs it was the guy
who came from another part of IBM and
said he wanted to work with our group so
he could make breakthrough discoveries
and I I was too kind to say but I said
to my colleagues I we didn't take him I
said to John smolen I said that's like
making a firm decision to be spontaneous
uh so here we are in a situation where
uh for years
people didn't take the subject seriously
and now maybe they're they're they're
too optimistic about what can be done
right away
uh
and my favorite example of this was was
about 20 years ago I met a scientist at
jet propulsion Laboratory
and he was saying the most proud
accomplishment in his life was on the
Voyager project
and they had applied to make it go to
all the outer planets but the word came
back from Washington most people don't
know anything besides Jupiter and Saturn
just go to Jupiter and Saturn and they
said but you know the planets won't be
lined up in the right way for another
200 years and the word came back from
Washington Congress understands about
two years not about 200 years just due
to Jupiter and Saturn so he says he and
all of the other side is working on it
and Engineers conspired to make
everything last
twice as long as it was as it really
needed to and each one said well you
wouldn't want this thing to fail just
because this part was wasn't wasn't
quite strong enough and he was working
on the the uh thermoelectric uh power
supply for it so if it's of course then
once it was launched they could
repurpose it and said go to all his own
so the the moral of the story is uh
sometimes you have to lie to the
politicians but if if you do it in the
right way and you don't do it too often
that may be the best thing for science
okay this is my summary of the the the
the subject
[Applause]
thank you very much
a lot to learn from this expression so
from this uh way to behave with the
politicians also so comments questions
yes
um yeah so you spoke about entanglement
so uh do you think in the in the quantum
computational speed up uh is there any
clear sign that entanglement plays a
role uh rather than superposition
it's hard to separate the two because
from the superposition principle you get
entanglement but they it's it's it's a
an important question because people
have asked
are is it does every useful Quantum
computation that where there's some
advantage over over classical it involve
entanglement and I think actually Peter
would know the answer that better I
think it does as Grover's algorithm
doesn't involve entangled States right
uh it does oh it doesn't involves
entangled States but it's you know it's
not really
it doesn't look like it entanglement
states are Central to Growers algorithm
but I don't think I don't think it will
work without entanglement yeah well one
argument you make is if you don't have
entangled States there's a there's a
a efficient way of simulating a Quantum
computation so so is there yes
you very happen to be very right
the only problem that they wanted it's
just they're stupid but since all of you
have mentioned it the no cloning theorem
I would like to call your attention that
everybody now who knows after to move
and other people have speaking I have
derived the learning theorem two years
before
two years before
antiques oh and there was also before
that there was this yeah it was even
more than two years before
I can send you to that yes no no I think
it was discovered in a paper that was
cited by by wooters
that had been written for like 10 years
before but it was not noticed
by
that has the proof in it too is this
earlier one I mean
yeah yeah so you didn't you got there
almost at the right time for to be
noticed
yeah so this is this is almost most
scientific discoveries occur this way
they're discovered three or four times
sometimes very well and it's not the
part of the discoverer that it was not
noticed it's just the time wasn't right
[Music]
okay so well let's set the charism again
[Applause]
so now it's uh the Lesser medalist is a
David Dodge David was born in haifan
Israel in 1953 the son of Oscar and
tigrador he attended William Ellis
School in Highgate North London
before reading Natural Sciences at Clark
College in Cambridge and taking part
three of the mathematical tribus
and he went to Wolfson College Oxford
for his Doctorate in theoretical physics
and I have to say that his supervisor
was Dennis shama was a well done figure
here interested and also a supervisor of
big scientists like including Stephen
Hawking and Martin Reese and his wrote
his thesis on Quantum field theory in
Coral space times
Debbie is one of the founding fathers of
quantum Computing he introduced the
notion of a Quantum turing machine that
will operate on arbitrary
superpositional states that is on qubits
the concept of the quantum logic gate
and Quantum circuit as well as the
network model of quantum computation he
showed that all possible operations on a
quantum computer could be generated by
combining sequences of a single kind of
three qubit logic gate
later Bennett short and co-workers show
that sequences of one cubit case and one
simple type of reversible classical
two-bit cases office
working working alone and with the
Richard Joseph from the University of
Cambridge Deutsche proposed the first
Quantum algorithms known as the Deutsche
and Deutsche Johnson algorithms showing
that Quantum computation could solve
certain problems faster than any known
classical computer algorithm and so
please let's all congratulate debit for
the work
[Applause]
thank you
foreign
[Applause]
called the mathematicians misconception
do you have slides no
slice okay very good
but you can use this or
hi can everyone hear that
yeah
okay well
nice to be here
um
a couple of years ago
the mathematician Hannah fry made a TV
documentary about Ada Lovelace
the 19th century computer Theory pioneer
it was about an episode
in the history of ideas
which would have been absolutely pivotal
if anybody had noticed it at the time
or in other words if Lovelace
hadn't died young
because
well from the evidence in that
documentary I suspect that the first
person to get
the universality of computation
was actually Lovelace and not her
colleague Charles Babbage the designer
of
the universal computer that she was
theorizing about the uh babbage's
analytical engine
never built but like many of these
computers the significance was in the
design and the theory rather than actual
building
the thing is
the analytical engine would have had two
kinds of universality
and Babbage was obsessed with one of
them
he had perhaps been the first human
being to understand what what one could
call arithmetical universality in his
previous design the Difference Engine
could compute polynomials in one fixed
Point variable so you know very limited
kind of universalities universal for
those but Babbage realized that if he
added just a few more features
conceptually very simple
the machine would make the jump to
universality becoming the analytical
engine Universal for
any arithmetic function of any number of
variables of any finite Precision
basically what we would today call
computable functions so this was
arithmetical universality
what Lovelace understood I think
was the significance of the analytical
engine's ability to compute not just any
arithmetic but anything in the world
in the physical world
she envisaged all sorts of applications
like computer music and art and chess
and and so on
but this wasn't just a matter of
usefulness
the abilities of the analytical engine
as a physical object
depend on a momentous property of the
laws of physics themselves all of them
namely
while the analytical engine could
instantiate a tiny fraction of all an
infinitesimal fraction of all
mathematical objects and relationships
it could also apparently
apparently
instantiate or simulate or emulate all
possible motions
of all possible physical objects and
their laws not just a tiny subset
this physical universality is an
intrinsic property of the laws of
physics
it doesn't follow from babbage's
mathematical arithmetical universality
it has nothing to do with mathematics
in fact neither of the universalities
follows from the other
yet it seemed that both of them were
exhibited by the same machine why
or whatever the reason
it's in the laws of physics it would
make no sense to try to prove this other
than from the laws of physics
this Unity of the two universalities was
also conjectured later
explicitly by Alan Turing in the 20th
century it's just turing's conjecture
sometimes called the church during
thesis it has various names
but the usual way that this conjecture
is described is not
that it's the unity of those two
universalities
why not
well turing's great paper presenting his
conjecture had an application as he put
it
to a fundamental puzzle
posed by the mathematician David Hilbert
basically what is the relationship
between a true mathematical statement
and a provable one Hilbert had hoped
that one could Define a system of proof
such that a mathematical statement was
true if and only if it could be proved
under that system
in the 1930s
mathematicians converge from several
directions on the realization that that
is impossible
notably Kurt girdle proved that there
can be no method of proof that
identifies all true mathematical
propositions
now turing's approach
did exactly the same in that respect
but it had wider implications as we now
know because of these physical objects
computers
the reason turing's approach had this
additional reach
was that
girdles model of proof
was a model inside the arithmetic of the
integers so nothing to do with
computation he simply defined proofs as
finite sequences
of symbols drawn from a finite set and
all that stuff
but there was no girdles conjecture
it was curing who realized that that
notion of what proving something means
isn't self-evidence so he acknowledged
it as a substantive conjecture the
Turing conjecture
the model of proof that he used was
computation
and the model of computation that he
used was physical
[Music]
strips of paper divided into squares
with symbols and a finite set of
discrete operations on them the
universal turing machine
and when he conjectured
that this machine was Universal for
proofs
the phrase he used was that it could
compute anything which would naturally
be regarded as computable
naturally
at the time the word computer meant a
human being it wasn't one of these
things it a person whose job was to
manipulate symbols on sheets of paper
and the manipulators obeying the rules
human beings are physical systems
so by
anything that would naturally be
regarded as computable
he meant computable in nature by
physical objects and by provable he
meant provable by physical objects
now that conjecture
unlike girdle's proofs
might have been false
but it turned out to be true in nature
or rather very nearly true
as Richard finally remarked
they thought they understood paper
but they didn't
and when when I
when I proved curing's conjecture from
quantum theory
in 1985 it was with the slight
correction that the universal machine is
not turing's paper machine nor babbage's
brass gear machine but the universal
quantum computer
but I soon found out
that not everyone saw it that way
the ref I also had a referee problem
that the referee of the paper in which I
I presented that proof insisted that
turing's phrase would naturally regard
as computable referred to mathematical
naturalness mathematical intuition not
nature
and so what I had proved wasn't turing's
conjecture it was about physics
so I asked some mathematicians what
mathematical intuition is
turned out it was as much of a mystery
to them as to me so some of them said it
was meta mathematical intuition
fair enough
but they couldn't tell me what that was
either
some kind of mathematical mysticism I
think
but one thing they were all adamant
about nevertheless was that turing's
conjecture was about whether his
mathematical model of proof matched
not the physical world but something
else
like mathematical Intuition or something
now turing's basic Insight was that
proof is computation and computation is
physical and hence proof is physical
that it isn't physical seemed to me a
philosophical absurdity
but it was an absurdity that all the
mathematicians I asked insisted on
and most
not all
most non-mathematicians who thought
about computation
didn't
so I called it the mathematician's
misconception the denial that proof is
physical is one way of putting it
by the way the Rolf landauer Charles
Bennett's old boss had been campaigning
for years with the slogan computation is
physical and proof also
just to be clear
mathematical facts
like Thurman's Last Theorem
aren't physical
that there is a difference between truth
and provability was the main point of
all those 1930s discoveries
still
in my paper I had to defer to prevailing
usage
so I changed it to Define turing's
conjecture as that vague meta
mathematical idea
and the referee at least agreed to let
me call my result a proof of the touring
principle
to distinguish it from the conjecture
the principle that there can be a
physical object whose motions contain
those of all other objects
nevertheless now people sometimes call
that the church Turing Deutsche
principle and and that's how that's how
the mathematician's conception ended up
giving me credit for something Alan
Turing did
and arguably Ada Lovelace did
a few years later I gave a talk in
Oxford arguing that it makes no sense to
regard turing's conjecture in any form
as something one might hope to prove one
day from from logic like Famous Last
Theorem
but that it could be proved to be a
property of quantum mechanics
sitting in the front row was Robin Gandy
who'd worked with Turing
and he got a bit agitated and at the end
he stood up
and declared
with Good Humor but very emphatically
I've never heard such a load of rubbish
in my life
I I tried to explain further but he
seemed implacable
he'd also given a talk at the same event
and at the dinner afterwards he came
over to where I was sitting and he said
you know I think there might have been a
grain of Truth in there somewhere let's
talk about it later and we did discuss
it later but unfortunately we did not
reach a resolution
he was a mathematician
he had the misconception
unfortunately in in the bigger picture
the mathematician's misconception is
done more than just Cole's amusing
anecdotes
it expresses the idea
acknowledged or not that somewhere out
there in in the world of mathematical
abstractions or in some Supernatural
world of mathematical intuition
there is the authentic official
though ineffable
now we know that Hilbert was wrong
ineffable definition of proof
and if some physical process that
doesn't conform to that definition
turns out to allow us to know some new
necessary truth
that process wouldn't constitute a proof
of that truth
there's the misconception
it so happens
that a Quantum computer's repertoire of
integer functions is the same as the
Turing machines they differ only in
speed
so some people view this as vindicating
that mathematician's misconception but
no
first of all we only know that they only
differ in speed from physics from
quantum theory
and second
quantum theory won't be the final Theory
of physics
and even if it is you can't prove that
either from mathematical intuition
in reality we only have physical
intuition never provable always
incomplete always full of errors
the misconception also affects thinking
about information
for example a Quantum cryptographic
device May perform a classical
information processing task that is
provably impossible classically
so the misconception makes people say
well Quantum cryptography isn't an
information processing task it's just an
engineering task like building a washing
machine
why because
Turing machines couldn't perform it
again they think that there's a
mathematical definition of information
out there somewhere independent of
physics
the same holds for probability by the
way
similarly again the answer to Eugene
wigner's famous question about why
mathematics is unreasonably effective as
he put it in science
is not that the mathem that the physical
world is actually being computed on a
vast computer belonging to God
or to supernormal aliens
because there's no reason
other than the misconception
why the snalian's computer
should itself generate that particular
tiny piece of mathematics that we call
computable
purely mathematical intuition will never
reveal anything about proof
or computation or probability or
information
if you want to understand any of those
things fundamentally you must start with
laws of physics
and in particular with what is currently
the most fundamental theory in physics
quantum theory
It won't always be the most fundamental
but its replacement
will not come from mathematics or logic
or the supernatural
okay that's it
[Applause]
provoking talk
any questions from any mathematician
s
I have a very simple question what is
physical
uh
yes
um it's a bit like asking what is real
um there there seem to be various I
don't know is the answer but there seem
to be various levels of reality
and there's a level that's only
accessible by experiment and then
there's the level that's to find out
what laws laws the laws are and then
there's the level that is independent of
the law so we know that Fermat's Last
Theorem is true and if if somebody comes
and and uh finds that general relativity
has a flaw or quantum theory as a floor
nobody will worry that maybe Fermat's
Last Theorem isn't true
laws of physics I think unlike that they
are things that could be overturned at
any moment we we guess at them
so I can't provide an answer better than
that it's it's
um it's a deep question
over there
yes
um yes um I think uh I am I am confused
can you
um
uh can you explain the difference
between what is like mathematical like
like
which is like in the top a mathematical
proof of physics proof from what I
understood is the physics one I think
well you have to draw a distinction
between
um what issues of what we can know how
do we know things their physics is at
the top
uh we we conjecture laws of physics we
test them from our physical intuition we
then develop mathematical intuitions
from uh from there we learn about
mathematics
uh however
um there are necessary truths which are
independent of the laws of physics and
they don't become any less necessary if
we don't know them
so as far as the necessity of Truth goes
um mathematics is at the top its truths
are necessary but our knowledge is the
other way around it comes via physics
that clearer
a couple of minutes so let me ask a
question myself
I know that you are a great advocate of
the Multiverse explanation for quantum
mechanics but now you also say the
quantum mechanics most probably is not
the last word can you
combine the two thoughts
the Multiverse
um is on the same level of of
um I mean the existence of the
Multiverse is is on the same level as as
the existence of the dinosaurs you know
it's that is not going to be proven
false what what is going to be proof
false is what the Multiverse consists of
what the what the structure of it is
we don't actually have a very good idea
of what the structure of it is at the
moment or even within quantum theory we
kind of know how to uh
do calculations and we know that
as we sit here in the lecture room there
are other copies of us uh watching a
different lecture and listening to you
know different people won the prize and
so on uh so we know that is true
but the details are going to change
because quantum theory is in many ways
totally unsatisfactory look at quantum
gravity for example
but just some people do not support this
Multiverse interpretation so you say
they're simply wrong or this well
they're all wrong in different ways but
yes
[Applause]
[Music]
well I'm going to ask David about
something that I think he thinks
uh
in this
would you describe yourself as as a
technological Optimist yes
okay well I used to be a technological
Optimist but I then
started studying a little bit cosmology
and maybe thinking too hard about the
copernican principle and it occurred to
me that perhaps the universe is infinite
but
the
self-destructive Tendencies of of the
civilization that we're in our
particular bubble suggests that it may
not last more than a few thousand years
and that's okay because they're
infinitely infinitely many other bubbles
where they do better
we're just not in a good one
uh but I think you think maybe one of
those bubbles will get will get it right
well enough so that it can spread its
beneficent influence throughout
everywhere whatever that means what's
your reaction to that question I think
the mistake there is is when you said
the the the evidence of our
self-destructive nature
by hour you meant our civilization or
our species or whatever yeah
suggests that we're
all possible
destroy yourself yes
well it's obvious that all that all of
our past was worse than the present and
the evidence that we're self-destructive
is all
what you might call extrapolation
it's extrapolating and in order to reach
that conclusion you've got to
extrapolate selectively
if we were ourselves we wouldn't be here
to complain about it uh well okay that's
that's one argument on the other side
but it's not very convincing because it
would could always be made no matter how
good things are
if you look at the uh actual details we
have time and again solve problems and
our particular civilization is different
from all other ones in the previous ones
in that respect so you can't extrapolate
from them either all civilizations
basically other than our current
scientific technological or whatever you
call it uh civilization have in fact
been destroyed
and it's another interesting thing is
that none of them were destroyed by the
ways that by the ways that pessimists
suggest hours will be destroyed so
there's again a disconnect so it doesn't
work
best thing
but it's very crappy question because
um how you you said the probability as
well as the validity which is true in
all interpretation both are physicals
how you make the distinction because one
is semantics essentially proved the
validity and the other part is purely
syntactical which is the probability I
don't think mathematical truth is
syntactical uh well if in that respect
I'm a platonist or something
yeah uh I think there are mathematical
objects out there only in a different
sense to the sense in which there are
physical objects out there but you have
to distinguish between
the necessary features of the things
that are out there and the method by
which we find out about them in the case
of the mathematical truths we definitely
only have access to an infinitesimal
proportion of them
but with physical truths we seem to have
access there's nothing that that seems
fundamentally hidden from us
perfect
[Applause]
and just to finish the event so let me
remind you that this is not yet over
there's a special event that was a post
ceremony public event this afternoon
starting at 6 30. this was a few minutes
from now in the savoya Excelsior Palace
interesting and it's a moderated
Roundtable discussion with a hardwood
Nevin who is a Google's director of
engineering here Alessandro corioni
who's the vice president of IBM Europe
and director of IBM research lab in
Zurich and Tomaso calorco the director
of Institute for complex Quantum systems
in the University of um and a little
figure for this the European commission
Quantum technology and Flagship project
so you are all welcome to participate
it's for the general public and there is
a boss that we hire that will take 50
people so all of the 50 or you ever want
to go is a first come first serve and
and then we will see you there so it
will be an interesting discussing about
the importance of econologics okay but
thank you very much and congratulations
again to all the awardees